---
title: Homelab Day 01
author: Loy Yee Ko 
pubDatetime: 2025-06-09T17:33:40.121Z
slug: homelab-day01
featured: false
draft: true 
tags:
  - Homelab
  - DevOps
description:
  Why a homelab?
---

## Table of Contents

# Why a homelab?

The reason was simple. College has finished, and my Dell laptop is basically useless. I wanted to do something with it, and I thought, "Why not set up a homelab?" It seems like a fun project and allows me to learn more about networking, servers, and various technologies. Most importantly, I could learn self-hosting open-source apps, which is something I've always wanted to do.

First of all, remove Windows and install Linux. After wiping the hard drive, install Debian 13 with a flash drive and iso file, but this is far from finished. Then `apt install` a bunch of packages including Docker, Nginx, ufw, tailscale, and SSH. SSH allows my MacBook to access the Dell laptop securely, and I use Tailscale to create a VPN network between the two devices. Now I can access the Dell laptop from anywhere, and it feels like I have my own server in the cloud.

Most of the tutorials aim for a professional home setup. They require a server rack with layers of computers, storage, memory, and Ethernet switches; my laptop can only use Wi-Fi and has only 16GB of RAM. I have to find a way to make it work with what I have, and I gave myself a challenge where I am not going to use [CasaOS](https://casaos.zimaspace.com/) but rely on Docker, Ansible, and Terraform instead. I want to learn how to set up a homelab the hard way, and I want to do it with the tools that professionals use. It will be a lot of work, but I am excited to learn and see what I can do with my homelab.

Finally, the whole goal of setting up the homelab is self-hosting open-source apps. Such as files and media storage, e-library, gems from the [awesome-selfhosted GitHub repo](https://github.com/awesome-selfhosted/awesome-selfhosted), and of course my applications! So stay tuned for updates on my homelab journey, and I hope to share my experiences and learnings with you all.
